All right.
>> Okay.
>> Okay. I call to order that no meeting
on April 7th, 2026 at 7:06 p.m.
Call the word
here.
>> Here
Bill was here.
>> Bill here.
>> Yeah, we have two people, but I don't
know. And we have Marina and Harman.
Yes.
>> Additions or changes in the order of
agenda. Approval of minutes from January
6th.
>> I think we approved those at the last
meeting.
I think we're up to approving the
minutes from February. Well,
>> did we have the February meeting? I
don't think we have February. We did
have February. Yeah.
Because we have minutes from February
on
>> I mean Dunian if you want to go back to
three you can adjust the agenda to add
>> the February approval of
>> it that needs to be adjusted. Okay. So
addition or changes in order to agenda.
So approval of minutes has to be for you
say February 3rd February 3rd.
I think we have any
motion to approve the minute.
>> All we got to make a motion to change
the agenda and then do a motion to
change the agenda from January 6th to
February 3rd.
>> A second. All in favor? I
>> pass.
Now I'll make a motion to approve the
minutes of February 3rd. Would anybody
else maintain this February? I did. And
uh
so
at the top of page two,
it says
Duncan motion to allow wetlands agent to
approve permit 2601 after the 14-day
period. That's the public hearing.
And I didn't know well one it doesn't
talk about the second I think we did
second it I think it was unanimous
approval
but I'm not sure we had weapons agent 14
days after
so I don't know that the bridge is
approved
>> approved
>> for the point
it's not here anymore
>> what we ask
>> I don't know what your last
I don't know either.
>> I don't know either.
Um I know John Kuskowski was going to be
involved maybe with like enforcements,
but I don't know. I think
would be able to help with that. I don't
know. I don't know
that one. I don't know. That's above my
pay grade.
>> Yeah.
>> So, can you read that again what the
motion was? Well, it said you motion to
allow the wetlands agent to approve the
permit application
by WWC number 26-01
after the 14-day period has passed for
the public hearing,
>> right?
>> Did we have a public hearing?
>> Do we even know that?
>> Well, maybe we we didn't have a public
hearing, but when uh when there's a
application posted in the paper,
>> right?
>> And then we have to
say that it was approved,
then there's 14 days that you have to
wait.
>> Well, we didn't approve. We put it on
the agent. I don't know what happened.
All I know is next day I know there's no
agent
>> and so I don't know how that
>> Yeah.
>> played out.
>> So Wayne was going to forward anything
to me. anything that came across his
desk or his attention about I don't know
anyone in the public reaching out or any
enforcement actions or anything like
that
and I have not heard anything him about
it but my my thinking is that it's
probably okay
but the record needs to be clear on how
that happened because you know Joe I got
that email from Joe right about the time
we were going to have the the March
meeting that we didn't have Right.
Right.
>> So, I think he was here till the
beginning of March. And if we did this
in February,
>> maybe it got done, but I I don't know
when he
>> I don't know how he approved it. I don't
know when he had to publish it in the
paper that it was approved because
that's what allows the public to take
the 14 days to report if they uh
>> and so I don't know what happened. Is
that doable? Can you call Joe Wagner?
>> I can't call him. Yeah. All right. I get
a hold of
>> I got a phone number right here.
>> I'm trying for Joe's email right now.
>> But the question is we should we should
have on our website, you know, the uh
the notice, the legal notice. There's a
legal notice that we have to have
published that he approved it.
You're
>> right. That's a good point. Okay. So
>> it better be kind of because we're out
there working at it or at least we're
getting right.
There's some stuff going on.
>> They had big orange signs this week.
So the thing for the minutes that I the
correction to the minutes that I was
looking for
was
that uh it was seconded by somebody and
>> it was it was you and it it passed 40.
Why I didn't
>> Okay. Well, and I went looking because I
went looking for the video to check it
out today and uh you know the video from
the last meeting was not available for
you.
>> Yep. I have you second. So I'll fix
that. You second and pass 4. So
otherwise I don't know. I mean the the
application's on the website but I don't
know.
>> There's no I don't see any public hear.
>> I don't know if it was in the
>> I didn't see it.
>> It's under archives already. So
>> Okay. Well, reach out to me about that.
Yeah.
is I mean I I guess he'd be acting as a
temporary
well.
>> Now the other question that I had on the
minutes was on item eight
where under agent report Joe Wagner
provided update had inspection on
property on Shotty Mill Road by transfer
station
application in for road construction to
begin after ground thoughts. I went and
looked under our archive to convert
things and there's no application in
there for
>> and so I don't know what that's talking
about
>> if they even came in if they even
submitted anything for it.
>> I don't see anything for
>> so I guess was there a house number or
anything there? I don't think you hear
that.
>> No, there's not. But I would think
that for that question, we might want to
defer approval of the minutes till the
next meeting where we can
>> all that up.
>> Sure. Yeah. Okay. So, I make a motion to
table.
It was just a second one. Correct.
>> You can just table both. You can just
table the whole motion. Yeah.
>> The
approval for
both items on
the minutes.
>> You just table the minutes. Just leave
them on the agenda for the next.
>> Okay. So, I have a motion to table the
minutes from last meeting.
>> I'll second. All in favor?
Motion pass. Yeah. I'll I'll talk to
Wayne about these and see what we can
come up with.
But I don't recall any discussion about
this
property put in the road yet. I don't
remember talking about that either.
>> Yeah.
Unless it was just supposed to be Joe
was going to receive the application and
bring it to us and then
>> that's what I thought it was and I don't
think anything ever
>> came from what I see on the website. I
don't see anything
>> the project.
>> Yeah.
>> Dissolve
>> anything. Yeah.
or they could be waiting on approval
because or agent in Portland because we
don't or agent maybe because we don't
>> there's no
>> and I think the
it's going to end up coming to the
commission for approval because even
when we get a new wetlands agent he's
not going to be certifying to do
anything in this
Okay. So we table that for now.
Okay. No public comment to hold
business.
New business. We receive application
permit number 26-2.
Replacement of bridge number 001007 Lake
Road over Chain Road.
>> That me.
>> That is you.
Um, how would you like me to do this?
Uh, just paper or
>> um, so Howard has some stuff on the
easel here and there's some stuff I can
share on the screen too. I guess
whatever is easier for you guys to
>> Well, I think it's
>> um
I think it's best to use what's on the
screen. I mean, we have all the stuff in
the uh on the website. Okay. And uh
>> he emailed me some
video record.
>> Yeah, some of the stuff on the website
is very grainy. So that's why we had it
here. You would just see it. I can share
both at the same time. So you let me
know. Whatever you want to start with, I
can pull up.
>> Yeah, you start with the drawings.
>> Any of these at the bottom there?
Yeah. Okay. All right. Um, good evening.
Uh, my name is Howard Farmer. Um,
professional engineer with Jacobson
Associates. I work with Joe Dylan. I
guess you guys probably know Joe Dylan.
Um, I've been working on this project
for a few years here. Um, it's a town
project. So, I'm here representing the
town. Uh, this is a a small culvert
project, probably big for this town. Um,
and it's a grantf funed project, and
I'll get into a little bit of that
later. I've got maybe five, maybe 10
minutes of stuff to tell you, just to
give you a quick smattering. You know,
this is the first meeting. Some towns
don't want to speak at all, but somebody
invited me here today, so I assumed you
would like a a bit of a presentation.
>> Sure.
>> Um, Wayne initially emailed me and just
kind of told us that this was going on
and how we normally go about these
things. I said that presentation just to
give us a background and kind of an idea
of you know what the plan is and what
your thoughts were.
>> Sure. Sure. Okay. But I do think I think
the town is paying for this one because
this is a town road and uh having gone
to the
finance you public hearing that they had
the other night. If it was on the state
road the state would be we could get
reimbured.
So this
>> not I don't think it makes any
difference from your presentation, but I
do think the town is on the hook.
>> So this is a this is a state local
bridge program project. So the state
bridge program is providing a grant for
50% of the total project cost.
>> You just had probably a $2 million
project on the per million,
>> right? So you recently had million
program project, right? Yeah.
>> Right. That was a little different. That
was probably 100%. was
>> or an 8020 splot one or the other.
>> So, this is 50/50.
>> Yeah. Okay. Yeah,
>> that you're ready.
>> Um, yeah. So, let's uh maybe the next
sheet there.
How about the colored ones? So, there
was remember the individual ones that
just sent a few, but let's go to the
colored ones. It's easier, I think, for
these guys to see.
Um maybe number one down there.
Yeah. Okay. So, so this is our existing
condition plan. Will this show up on
you to see it? So, I'm just going to go
with it. Um so,
The existing cover carries Lake Road
sort of in an east west orientation uh
over Chenny Brook which flows from south
at the bottom of the sheet up towards
the north towards um the the lake. Um
the cover is just immediately east of
Basola uh Lake Road. The wetlands are um
well obviously you can see the brook
which sort of a light blue and then the
sort of shaded blue on the outside of
that. So the first dark line, if you
will, is the uh the Wellman line. The
green line way up over to the left of
the sheet is a 200 foot upland review
line. And then the next line to the
right of that, the blue one there,
that's 100 foot. And if you look way
over to the right, you'll see a little
bit of green. And if you look to the
left, is a little bit of a light blue.
Um the darker blue upstream, dark blue
line dashed upstream and downstream. So
that's the 100redyear existing flood
plane. Just to give you a sense for how
much of the woods would flood during a
100red-year storm event, the existing
cohort is a 14 foot span by 8.25 foot
rise bolted corrugated metal pipe arch
with a a concrete um invert. Uh barrel
length is about 37 feet long. The
direction of water flow. The roads about
30 feet wide. Um the barrel has a
perched outlet. Sure you guys have heard
of that sort of thing before. Sort of
prevents the passage of aquatic
organisms wanting to swim upstream. Uh
bedrock is visible right at the uh
outlet. So bedrock is pretty high and
that was confirmed with some borings
that we did. The the problem with the
cover and maybe you could go to the uh
photos. I think it was the first
emails I sent you tonight and I think
it's the filters.
So the problem with the culvert um is um
the downstream wing walls and parapits
are uh cement mason units and there's
100% section loss of a number of flanges
and webs of random sections. That's yeah
keep scrolling down. Okay, there you go.
It's good enough to see. So that's the
downstream side. So each one of what
you're looking at is cement masonry
units. I don't know exactly what's
behind that. You know, it could just be
a vertical wall that's, you know, not
very wide. So, there's not a lot left
holding the run up. Um, roadside
barriers don't meet current standards of
design. And of course, I mentioned the
perched outlet. The, um, upstream side
of the bridge has cast in place wing
walls and head walls, but for whatever
reason on the downstream side here, they
used cement masonry units.
Um, show the um, opposed plans. will be
the second colored plan. So, it was the
email that I sent tonight that had two
PDFs. That'll be the one that says
number.
Yeah, that there.
Okay. So, this is colored. It's a little
bit busy, but it's colored. So, I think
you get the the idea. So the extent of
the road work um is sort of at at the
limits of these these hatched areas are
basically uh a road construction
entrances but you can see the limits of
the road work. The width of the road is
going to remain the same in 30 ft. The
geometry is the same. Both the vertical
profile horizontal profiles the same.
The intersection for both solar road is
essentially the same. Although when you
pull out of a solar and you take a right
the radius is going to be enlarged a
little bit. Uh there is some storm
drainage. You can see three catch bases
kind of around the Walaw Lake Road
intersection. Those are going to
discharge through the wall. The proposed
structure, the proposed structure is
going to be a uh pre-cast reinforced
concrete three-sided frame. So, it's
sort of like a box cover with no floor.
And that's going to sit and I'll show
you a detail later on. You you'll
understand it completely, but it's going
to sit on a pre-cast, excuse me, a cast
inplace reinforced footing, which is
going to be poured directly on the rock.
And then the rest of the concrete
portion of the bridge will also be cast
in place, reinforced the wing walls,
head walls, bridge rail, parapit, and
walls. Um, I'll show you some details
afterwards just to get you a quick a
quick review of that.
The uh bridge was designed hydraulically
per the DOT drainage manual for 100-year
storm event based on the contributing
drainage area. Um, roadside barriers
will be improved. We'll have a bridge
bredell and approach gyro which will be
the current standards. Um I'll show you
this too on another detail but we're
going to have inside the barrel we're
going to have a riparian shelves on both
sides of the channel. So for those
terrestrial animals and I've seen this
actually they like to run along the edge
of the stream rather than having to go
up over the embankment with a potential
mortality issue now they can you know go
through the barrel. Um I have seen it
>> I have seen it actually happen that way.
So it does happen. Um, we're also going
to have uh natural stream bottom
material placed back anywhere where the
channel is disturbed. It's sort of the
the grayish area in the middle uh of the
channel both up and downstream of the
culvert. Um culvert's going to be
slightly realigned. So the outlet will
be the same position horizontally. The
inlet will move to the east about six
feet. um primarily because otherwise
just created a very very steep slope um
and tall walls taller walls to climb
back up to the basil road
um from a permit perspective um actually
let me do erosion control perspective
because that's really what we're here
for tonight. So this is um from our
erosion control plan. Um there are
erosion checks around the toes of the
slopes which are I guess that green
color which are um blankets will have
blankets on all the slopes. The inlets,
the catch basins will all have con um
controls around those. There'll be
construction entrances at the three um
sort of entrances to the project if you
will. Uh we have a dedicated pump
discharge point at the far northeast
quadrant there. If you look downstream
of the bridge to the right, you'll see a
little square. So, it's outside of the
wetlands, but in a sort of a flat area.
So, the water coming out of that will
will flow back into the channel. I can
show you pictures of the erosion control
details if you'd like to see that.
Um, there's also going to be on this
plan, I think we show there's 34 plants
to sort of reestablish the embankment.
Um,
okay. Yeah. And I think that's that's
going to be it for this one. From a
permit perspective, obviously we're here
tonight for a weapons permit. The town
determined that a planning zoning CGS824
permit is not required. We're going to
pursue an Army Corps permit under the
nationwide program that came out in the
middle of March. Um D's granted a 401
water quality certification to them for
the two nationwide permits that this
project would would fall under. It's
going to be one of the two. So that's
taken care of. Uh as part of that
federal permit process, there's some due
diligence work that we had to
accomplish. We checked the uh DP natural
diversity database. Based on the last
map we saw, this project's not in an
area of concern. We had to reach out to
the state historic preservation office.
They have no concerns. Had to reach out
to US official wildlife. Um they
identified a bat and a butterfly and
we're going to be dealing with that. And
um also had to reach out to four
different Indian tribes and we did not
receive any response. But that is very
typical. no response. Is there a
response in my uh my experience? And
then um the agency that seems to carry
the largest sword in the equator here
would be Connecticut D Inland Fisheries
Division. Um their primary comment was
to um maintain a certain peri time of
year restriction for unconfined instream
activities. We obtained that comment
from them prior to the new nationwide
permit release in March, which is
actually a more restrictive time of year
restriction for Connecticut, which
basically is that uh no one can find in
stream work in uh April, May or June,
and you cannot put a coffer dam in or
take it out during April, May, or June.
And that's a little bit different than
the way it used to be. So, right now our
drawings have the note on there that
complies with fisheries, but it's on my
to-do list that we're going to change it
to comply with core because we have to
uh submit this to the core and it will
be acceptable to fisheries. It's now
sort of the de facto standard basically
April, May, June, spring season, no one
can find activities and no installation
of a coffin dam or removal. You used to
be able to put a coffin dam in or take
it out any time of year. It didn't
matter. Um but now April, May, and June
are out of play.
Um
so maybe what I do, can we um go back to
the big set of plans? I could just show
you real quickly the general plan so you
can just see the structure real quick
in case there's any confusion about what
it might look like.
>> Um it's in the Yeah, it's in the
progress.
It's probably about halfway accept.
Is this the original bridge of this
rotor?
>> Excuse me. Is this the original bridge
of this road? Do you know?
>> Well, I'm not that old. I don't know. I
don't know. Um and and for all I know,
the bridges there now could have been a
replacement for something prior. Yeah.
The lake didn't used to be there.
Never mind.
There you go. Yeah. I just uh wanted you
to see a depiction of the elevation
viewing structure for whatever that's
worth. Um maybe um I just want to let
them see the plan view at the top. Yeah.
So at the plan view in the top right
corner of the sheet which shows the plan
of the the frame. You can see the
parapits along the edge of the road. But
I wanted you to see the storm drain line
opposed. It's going to come through the
wall of the frame and then uh we'll have
a little bit of rip wrap beneath that
because there's water dripping out of it
and I don't want it to take away from
the riparian shelf or or the uh channel
within the barrel. If you can scroll the
sheet up just a little bit, you can get
a sense there. You get a sense for the
channel for the barrel. Sort of a
trapezoid with two shells on the left
and right.
>> So you're saying the water on the road
is going to be going down into inside
and draining into the river or stream uh
under the bridge. Um so the water of the
road would get intercepted by the catch
basin grates and then conveyed by pipe
between those catch basins and that pipe
rather than discharging to the channel
outside the bridge would come through
the wall of the bridge and discharge to
the channel you know within the
structure. So I I believe the invert is
going to be about 5t above the riparian
shelf if I recall correctly. Um,
we had, you know, I had difficulties
trying to take that in like right down
to the stream. Um, it's the steep the
channel is very steep down from the
embankment is steep down to the stream
and
>> you know I would rather not put you guys
tell me what you'd like but I would
rather not put the outlet right at the
edge of the stream and just I'd rather
have it sort of spill on something or
have some sort of erosion control or
ideally it'd be better just to let it
sort of cascade down some sort of a
slope with rip wrap but um this seemed
to be the better alternative in our
opinion. Every town's different. Not
sure.
>> So, so how far up how high up is it
going to be the opening into the
out of the bridge? Um, let me
just double check
a real number.
Yeah, about 5T about 5T um to the
invert. It's a 15-inch corrugated
plastic pipe that will go through the
wall of the frame. And so the invert
would be at about the 5ft level.
So it'll be dropping out to drop from
there down to some rip wrap.
Right. Right.
>> Then that'll run into a stream.
>> No. Run into a stream.
>> It's interesting.
Is it It's going to be on the inside.
>> Yeah. Right here.
>> Okay.
>> So, this is the This is So, this is the
roadway.
>> Yeah.
>> And these are the parapits bridge rails.
These are the walls of the frame.
Correct. The frame here.
>> Oh, so okay. So, it's going to be coming
this way.
>> Yeah. This views you'd actually don't
see it, but it sort of be coming through
the wall
past that.
>> No, no, no, no. Right. Right. Flush to
the inside of the wall. So, the water
would
>> it's not going to come shooting out of
there.
>> That's where the rip rabbit is going to
be right here.
>> Yes. Exactly. Which is what we show that
square area there. It's just in these
views. You don't see that.
>> Sure.
>> So, we didn't show flush there.
>> Yes. Right. The end of the pipe will be
flush with the inside of the wall of the
frame.
>> How far is the rip bed supposed to come
out into the channel?
>> Um I I
show it with a Yeah, a break line here.
The attempt is we're going to bring it
right down to the bottom, but make that
a little bit clearer.
>> Yeah, we're bring it right down to the
bottom. I really don't want it to erode
anything on it way down,
>> right? Yeah,
>> because that was my concern. I don't
want to cause any like turbidity inside
the channel bottom and wash out that
channel bottom and have, you know, your
sediment moving downstream.
Yep.
Um instruction period, we're looking at
the June to October,
fivemonth period in 2027.
So go out probably to bid later this
year or early next year. Um
we do we do have bypass pipes. We got to
do the construction in the dry. So we're
going to put two smaller diameter bypass
pipes right through the existing pipe
and then use sort of sandbag super sacks
to create a coffer dam on the upstream
and downstream sides of that bypass pipe
so the contractor can dewater the work
area. Um, and that was also designed per
the DOT denge manual in this case for a
two-year storm.
Um, that's about it. It's, uh, you know,
I'm opening up to your questions. Again,
it's a it's a it's a grant funed
project, 50% town project. Um, right now
the town is hopefully going after
getting the easements. really about well
one of the things will be holding up
going out to bid but we have a little
bit of time between now and the end of
the year or say the January time frame
when we go out to bid
>> what would you say the safety is on this
bridge right now
>> safety on the bridge right now uh you
know I I wouldn't want to say I wouldn't
want to say I would go on record and say
I can tell you that typically you know
if a bridge is not posted the idea is
it's capable of carrying all state legal
loads that's not to say that there's was
the problem.
>> Yeah.
>> Um I we haven't been asked to go out
there and take a look at it beyond the
initial look. We did. So I mean when I
went out there initially, you know, the
metal was in pretty decent shape. There
was a little bit of corrosion. Not bad.
It's that downstream wall that's a
little disturbing because it's a fair
drop from the road to the invert. And
you sort of wonder, you know, is that
the masonry you're looking at? Is that
the only thing holding up the road
embankment?
>> Is there concrete behind it? Is there
something more behind it? because it
sure looks horrible standing looking.
>> I was there today. I went by there just
to check it out. Man, this thing
terrible.
>> Yeah. So, it's it's something that
definitely needs to be done. It's a it's
a decent drop from the road to the
inverter.
>> And so, the road is going to be closed
for the you in that area for the period
June through November whatever. Yes, the
road will be closed and um we have to
maintain access to Pola. I didn't really
go over the M&P plan, which I could if
you like. I didn't think it was too
dramatic, but uh we're going to have to
cut sort of a one lane shared road. Uh
yeah, as you're coming out of Pola,
you're going to you're going to veer off
to the left before you actually get to
the intersection. Oh.
>> And um we're going to if the property
owners listening now, it's going to be a
surprise. I don't know if the town's
reached out to them yet, but uh we've
got to get an easement from them to have
a onelane shared road to connect Bolo
back to Lake Road. So it kind of skirts
the work. All the work will be on the
right as you drive on that one lane
road.
>> Um so Lake Road will be closed, Bolo
would be open.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> Um equipment staging for the
construction. Um where would the
equipment be staged? Yeah, typically
typically they do that right in the
road. Um and because it's closed that
makes sense reality.
>> Okay. Um what are the potential
vegetation impacts and how will they be
penalized? These are questions that um
we had from another board member that
could be your time.
>> Yeah. Um maybe the first thing I should
do is maybe go can we show from here the
very last plan is an environmental
impact plan
>> in this
>> in this set. Maybe I start with that.
Sure.
There we go. So, can you can you zoom
in?
So, this is the last plan in the set.
Um, and this is going to this is showing
sort of environmental impacts. There is
a table off to the right on the drawing
which is sort of out of the view at the
moment but all these little numbers in
the white uh refer to that table. So for
instance the red number one is a
permanent impact to the workhorse.
That's actually where the existing
barrel is.
Um the green is um temporary impact to
the water course. Although I will tell
you I don't I believe this is this is an
error here uh on the inlet side on the
left. all that that all the grading
going back up the hill that should be a
permanent impact in the lower course
that should be red. So that area
um seven really should be adjusted
excuse me that's a permanent impact in
the wet and not a temporary impact in
the run. Um, so vegetation impacts, you
know, the embankment is sort of steep
out there now and obviously if we're
going to be grading the embankment, the
vegetation um is going to be disturbed,
removed, trees would be removed. Um,
slopes would be organized to a 2 to1
smoke. That's why we've got uh, you
know, we reestablish the vegetation. At
the moment, it's a it's a seed typical
seed mix. There are 34 plants proposed
that we had our soil scientists
recommend based on um I guess the the
moisture of the soil or how close you're
planting lower to the wetland. He's got
one species. If it's a little higher up
is a different species and that's sort
of out of my wheelhouse. Um one thought
that I had driving up here tonight is uh
if this is something that the commission
would like to see. Some commissions like
to see this. So the rip wrap we have um
on our detail is pretty much just rip
wrap. But the interstases the voids are
filled to make it a solid mass. Um some
towns like to see a little bit of top
soil on that and then perhaps a wetman
seed mix where it's appropriate. We run
the rip wrap right above one foot above
the uh 100year flood plane line. But
perhaps down low um a wetland seed mix
would be appropriate and then maybe the
other half of the rip wrap with a
regular seed mix. I mean, be happy to if
that's something this commission feels
important, we could um incorporate
something like that. Um I don't want to
be be so cold suggested addition of
approval, but that I guess that's how
perhaps it could be. I'm not sure.
>> I don't know how everybody else feels.
Part of me almost feels that just the
plain brick roof wrap would be better to
catch any sediment coming from anywhere
else before it goes into the water
course versus putting vegetation back.
What are your guys thoughts?
It's pretty steep there.
>> Real steep, especially on that left
side.
>> Yeah. All the wash in. It's going to
wash in. Doesn't matter if you
>> with the rip rat or the other.
>> It's that's a
>> that's steep like this
>> out there today. Which is why you see a
lot of grading, you know, all around the
bridge down the embankments. We're we're
trying to organize that back to a two
months.
kind of like when it goes down then kind
of maybe try to make it a little less of
a before it gets to the water. What are
you saying?
>> Um it it is actually on the inlet as
you're approaching the bridge on the
right. It definitely is. You can see on
the right is
>> um and and there's a little bit on the I
guess on the outlet on the left and the
right because of the remains of the
riparian shelf. Um, not so much on the
inlet to the left. You know, this
there's a little bit of riparian shelf
and then of course it goes right up to
the one right up to Bosola.
>> Right.
>> Yeah.
>> So, I'm saying it's like it's steep
steep steep and it goes right down to
the water steep. And is there like
would you think about maybe making it
less steep when you get closer to the
water?
>> Um, it off a little bit. I mean to make
it less steep getting closer to the
garden would be a a major revision. Um
footings would have to be dropped on the
walls all the walls because you know the
grade is is maybe it's a little less
steep at the bottom maybe I don't know
how much you're thinking about and then
it goes up two to one to make it even
less steep and then you know push those
temporary those permanent grades back
would require dropping the footings
more. our footings are sort of stepped,
you know, as a grade climbs, we don't
want to keep the footings real deep
because it's sort of a waste of money if
we don't need to keep them that deep.
So, the footings get stepped trying to
maintain a frost protection over the
bottom footing. Um,
yeah.
I know on the last bridge we were
talking about there was any discussion
by Hank Groomer and I didn't hear any of
that here and I don't know if there's
just no
heptoologist
concern with this one. I mean the last
one was over the Hop River and this
one's called Little Brook but
>> Hag is a herpatologist.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah. So, this project did not fall
within an NDB area of concern based on
the last map we looked at. Okay, that's
usually the trigger. They'll write back
and tell you what species and you know,
typically it's a turtle.
>> Okay.
>> Typically, it's a wood turtle, a box
turtle, or
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Usually what we have.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. This one This one didn't have
that.
>> Okay. So far,
>> there are wood turtles in Brook.
Well, I somebody could there's a form
you can fill out with deep and um and
then what they do is those bubble areas
change. They publish that map I think
once or maybe twice a year.
>> Yeah.
>> And um it changes.
>> So I guess it depends who gets there
first, you or me.
>> I would think that either you or Wayne
would just reach out to Hank and make
sure he doesn't have any concerns about
that. I know that cuz I live over there
and I I've seen them.
>> Okay.
>> They there are they are there. I've seen
Korea. So,
>> okay.
>> Now, they weren't I didn't go over there
by the bridge, but I mean upstream.
So, just so you know, just
>> I mean, I don't know why we couldn't
just incorporate something about that.
So we typically, you know, unless unless
the DP tells us something specific they
want with respect to turtles, what I
would suggest is we like to put a
picture of a turtle on the drawings and
color so everybody can see what a wood
turtle looks like. I'm talking about the
contractor's personnel. And then we have
sort of standard uh turtle protection
notes which sort of follow what DP would
typically tell us. things like putting
up exclusionary fencing, you know,
sweeping the area in the morning, get
the turtles out of there if you have if
there are any there, knowing what they
look like. Um, you know, they're
protected so you don't you don't hurt
them. Uh, and you pick them up, you put
them out in the direction we're walking,
that sort of thing. So, I mean, if
that's something the commission feels
important, we can certainly add that
regardless of what she says because
they're there.
>> Wood turtle, you're saying
>> they're in there.
I'm an eyewitness.
>> One concern I know that we've had as a
commission before was certain bridge
projects like I think it was long hill
um in the proposed plan was to remove
some vegetation and then after the
project you know Jed had the concern
also before a lot more vegetation was
removed that was not talked about. Um
what are your thoughts on that?
>> I mean we have so the lines with the
like in the bottom of the she saw with
the three dashes are easements.
>> Um we don't have a legal right to go
outside those easements. Um you're
seeing the sort of curly line that
follows the toe of the slope as sort of
clearing limit.
You know uh my thoughts are we've got
this thing braided and there are no more
contours to show. This is these are all
the contours there are. There's nothing
forgotten in here. And we don't have the
right to go beyond. Um
I don't know if you could you could pan
so you can see the outlet side of the
easement lines going around everything.
So I guess so there's there's room to
move there. Maybe that's a concern on
the downstream side far left and right.
There's a lot of white area there beyond
the the woods. But usually you know what
we'll do is there'll be an inspector on
this job from our office. That's the
plan at the moment. Um and uh the
contractor is required to you know use a
license surveyor to flag the limits and
then our inspector would walk it with
them and make sure it generally you know
follows the the plan. Um
I've had projects before and I'm not
suggested this here where commissions
have said I want you to put a jersey
barrier all the way around the perimeter
of the work to make sure because that's
a pretty definitive thing. You know,
it's easy to knock a silk fence over,
but getting a jersey bearer, you know,
20 foot stick of it or 10 foot stick of
it through the woods, multiple is pretty
disturbing in of itself. Maybe the thing
to do is put up silk fence and maybe
maybe you want snow fence also. You
know, it's a little higher is orange. Um
maybe something like that would help to
reinforce not not structurally but
reinforce that hey this is the limit.
Um, so that that external limit that you
have there, is that just going to be
flagged or is that going to be still
current?
That outside line
>> the line the easement line. Oh, um, so
you're wondering why it's so is it just
going to be flagged right now or are you
guys actually playing?
>> I'm not sure I understand. Is it just
going to be flagged?
>> Like just just the boundaries are just
going to be marked like
>> Oh, the line will be marked in the
field. Okay. Is it are you guys putting
up silt fence or is that not part of the
plan?
>> Yes. No, sil fence is part of the plan.
>> Okay.
>> That was that was my question. I guess
you guys are using sil fence.
>> Yeah. And in our surveyor um that's part
of what we do was to you know put up
stakes and flagging and all the turning
points and temporary easements. I don't
think there's any Oh, there's a small
permanent easement on this one and
they'll physically you know put a pipe
or a mod in for that but
>> Sure.
>> Yeah.
So, so a concern of mine, you know, is
if we have a weapons agent, he's our
expert, you know, and and again, you
know, I've been kind of if Hank likes
it, I like it. But
>> I think the last bridge would turn over
the wetlands agent to approve. You know,
we ought to I'm not sure we should be
approving this without the benefit of a
wetland agent.
>> Sure.
>> I don't know where we stand on hiring
one of those,
>> right? Technically, we have no one in
the field right now currently to right
>> to oversee the project.
>> Well, and he's supposed to come to us
and say, "I like it."
you know, I think this is a good plan or
whatever. He's our technical expert on
that stuff. And I'm sure the plan is
great.
>> Sure.
>> You know, to uh to represent, you know,
it it
Nathan Jacobson, you know, is our
town engineer. So, you know, I'm sure
that's all there, but the key a key guy
on the commission is down here, right?
>> Yeah, that's definitely a valid concern.
that we don't have someone representing
commission on site or you know visiting
the site or going with the plans or
Yeah.
And we know does anybody know where we
stand in the new region?
>> I have not heard anything.
>> Okay. Yeah.
>> It's not your fault. That's our right.
>> Yeah. No, I I understand the
frustration.
>> Sure. I mean, at least for now, it's
we're once receiving them.
>> Yeah. Till we got at least we got
another month. But
>> correct.
>> It is a concern of mine that that our
agent isn't working with Howard to
>> concern. Yeah.
Or, you know, because really we have no
one right now to present any concerns or
positive or negative, you know, things
to us. Yeah.
So, yeah, I guess we can receive the
application.
>> I guess we could ask Joe Dylan to uh
fill in that role, but I he probably uh
I'm sure he's all in favor of it. He
must
>> Yeah, that'd be sort of a strange
conflict. Yeah. I mean, Joe's right in
my office across the hall from It's It
really should be an independent person
if that's what you're you want it
reviewed. It should be something to
repent for. Yeah,
>> I'm sure we'll try to figure it out.
>> Yeah.
>> Um, if there's sediment build up on the
upstream side of the bridge, how is that
going to be sediment?
>> Upstream side of the bridge. So
>> my phone
um I think is somebody thinking about
just just random
maybe we should look at the war handling
plan maybe that
>> let's do that also probably in the first
third of the set.
>> So I'm thinking if you have sediment
build up on up side on the upstream side
of the bridge once that builds up is
that going to wash downstream and change
the water course. All right. Yeah, let's
take a look at the water again.
>> I put in my work when I was putting the
passc.
Oh, yeah. Yeah. Very fast. It's probably
I don't know. I guess like she or
something.
each on the top of the left.
>> It just seems weird that they're just
one on top of another.
They're just all that all
>> original.
They're all They're just old. We haven't
uh haven't done haven't been worked on.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, this is the the water handling
plan I mentioned before about sleeping
two smaller diameter pipes through the
existing barrel with sort of these
supersack type sandbags. You guys have
probably seen them. They're like a cubic
yard um to create a coffee dam up and
downstream. I you know,
I don't Is there going to be sediment?
How's the sediment going to be handled?
First of all, I'm thinking to myself
that, you know, the coffer dam is going
to maintain the flow. So, you know,
you're going to get flow from upgrading.
So, to go through the pipes, to come out
of the pipe, continue on mering way. But
is somebody thinking that they're, you
know, while that's going on, we're going
to get some sedimentation coming down
the slopes and into the brook. I guess
that's what somebody's saying. Um, so I
guess I was
>> Are they looking for some more erosion
control at at the base of slopes? Um, we
have rip wrap which to your point is one
reason to leave it the voids open
because if you do get ceed coming down,
>> it catches there. Yeah. The other thing
I'm thinking about is um we have a rose
control blanket on all the vegetated
slopes.
>> So, you know, will there not be any
sedimentation? I mean, I can't stand
here and say that, but I can tell you
that would be a heck of a lot better
than something that, you know, was not
uh blanketed, especially because, you
know, when you first put the top so the
seed down, sure enough, you get a big
old rainstorm just Yeah.
>> Um and I'm thinking that by the time,
you know, once the the bridge is in
place, the wall walls are in place,
um most of the walls are in place, that
water handling can come out of there.
Um, that's not really answering the
question. I guess the bigger I guess the
bigger issue is that we've got rip wrap.
The rip wrap starts right at the um most
upstream and most most upstream end of
the natural stream bottom materials. All
rip wrap on the on the banks all the way
to the bridge. So at the total of all
that slope on the upstream side and on
the downstream side, it's sort of the
same thing. I don't know if you can you
guys can see the difference in the hatch
pattern between the blanket area and the
rip wrap. It's kind of hard to detect. I
think on the screen here.
>> Yeah,
>> but there's um I can maybe I could point
here.
>> Maybe maybe just up or down stream.
>> Yeah. On the as you go through the
barrel on the right hand side, there's a
wood
>> that goes all the way to that coffer
dam. Can you see the hatch with sort of
the circles in it?
>> Yeah. Yeah. And the same with on the
left side after you go through the
barrel. I guess that's that's probably
what capture any seven.
Are you going to be reworking those uh
by the road? Not right at the stream,
but where you have all those lines and
uh numbers. Are you going to rework that
whole area or you going to leave what's
there? there.
There rocks over there.
>> Um,
so
I could point to it here, Bill.
>> Yeah, that spot.
>> Yeah, but you're along this along the
stream edge. Can you zoom in to the
outlet area in particular? Yeah, just
>> Okay.
Yeah. So this this area is sort of a
continuation to the riparian shell. It's
fairly flattish compared to the 2:1
slope. So to your point, you come out of
the channel, you know, the channel needs
to have a defined a little bit of a
defined bank and you're coming up out of
that channel about 3 ft,
you know, and there some some other
level area that's sort of the end of the
riparian shell. It gets a little wider
as you come out of the bridge and then
the slope begins to come up. So to your
point, you know, you got a channel, it
does flatten out a little bit and then
it goes back up. I don't know if that's
sort of answering your question. You can
see that over here too. Comes up about 3
ft from the channel because that's what
we have going through the barrel. We
have sort of a little trapezoidal
channel and then this flattish area
here. It's it's not completely flat.
It's, you know, about a one foot drop
across it, but it's flatter than 2:1
considerably. And that's the
continuation of the riparian shelf. And
then from there, it's 2 to1 back up. You
can look at the from that side too.
See the same thing over here. This is
Yeah, you can we see the same thing here
in this area. Um and then over here as
you approach the barrel on the left.
Okay. I guess my question really is is
you're going to
it's already kind of what you're do
talking about, but are you going to
rework it and is this all going to be
redone along the road there?
>> Oh, per these plans? Yes.
>> Okay. Yeah. Because it's already there.
There's stuff there already. And it kind
of looks similar to what you have up
there. But
>> yeah, if you really studied it and you
looked at uh we look at another plan
that has just the contours but none of
the hatch, you can see the proposed
contours versus existing. I mean, I
could show you that it's it's
>> So, you're going to
>> kind of do the same, but not really.
>> You're going to redo it.
>> We're going to redo it. We're going to
redo it. Yeah. In some places, it's very
steep.
>> You're going to redo that old stuff cuz
>> somebody dropped a whole lot of rock out
there already. I don't know if you
probably have seen it.
>> I haven't been out there in a few
months.
>> Yeah, there's a lot of rock there
already. Where was that dropped?
>> President said that relatively
>> I don't know why it was put there. It
was just there
>> something recent.
>> Probably probably for the the you know
the the same thing that we've just been
talking about of silk running down off
the road and off that slope down into
that area into the stream. But because
there's so much rock there, there's not
going to be a lot of silk coming up
there.
>> Where where was it dropped? I'm just I'm
just concerned that something that would
affect the cost of the job. I have to
have somebody swing right here. This
this spot right here
only dropped
>> place. Yeah. Right over here. This whole
area.
>> Oh, okay. So, something recent.
>> Uh something kind of recent. I mean,
within Hey, I don't know how long, but
All right. We'll take a look at that and
look back at our existing condition. I
mean, it's I was just, you know, you may
answered my question actually. You're
going to redo the whole thing. That's
what I'm asking.
>> We're going to redo the whole thing.
>> You're going to redo that whole thing.
>> Again, if you study it, you'll see
there's a difference between the
existing contours.
It's going to get redone.
>> So, you said the outlet's going to be in
about the same place, but the inlet is
going to move more east. Is that going
to change water velocity at all?
>> No. If anything, the water velocity uh
is going to is going to decrease
certainly in a large storm, a much
larger waterway area, almost twice the
span.
>> Okay.
>> A larger opening.
>> Yeah, the existing is is 14 ft.
>> Um,
you know, we we wanted to put a riparian
shelf in there. I know that's something
that I I don't believe it's currently a
regional permit requirement from the
core, but I've had projects in the past
where the core have asked for that and
we thought this would be an appropriate
place for that. And that's not the shelf
is two or three feet wide. I don't
remember. We can look at the plan. Um so
you have the channel bottom inside the
barrel that kind of comes up at 2 to one
or three or four feet. And then that
riparian shelf. Um you add all that up
together, you end up with about a 28
foot span.
>> How big? 21
>> about 28th 28 and also I should say that
um the core permit requires that the the
span be at least 1.2 times the bank full
width
>> of the existing channel um and I know
that played into it as well and there
wasn't a lot of hydraulic improvement
here because that really isn't the
issue. The real issue is is that
downstream wing wall going to hold up or
we going to lose that wing wall that's
got to be repaired. Um
and um anyway, so I don't recall
exactly, but it could be that the 1.2
bank full width controlled the span at
28T span, but then it it worked out with
making the travel channel and repairing
the shelves.
>> And you said right now the span is 14
>> 14 ft.
>> Yep.
>> So um you're not going to use that same
material that they that's up there now,
right? Same kind kind of what are you
going to put up kind of is it all
concrete?
>> Yeah, all the concrete will be except
for that the frame will be pre-cast
concrete.
>> Everything else will be reinforced cast
and place concrete.
>> Yeah, we're not going to use CMUs which
are you know concrete units
where the storm water control comes out
on the inside there. That's going to be
pretty fast.
Correct.
>> Now, is there any potential for freezing
on that for to I don't know reduce storm
water control if that freezes as as it's
coming out?
>> Oh. Oh, as it comes out. Yeah. I suppose
you could get a little bit of icing, but
you know, it's like any other storm
drain. It's uh you know it's ground is
fairly warm and then pipes are down
there three and a half feet and you know
you don't I don't think I've ever really
seen a storm drain freeze
you know in the dead of winter I mean
you know who knows what the future holds
for temperatures in the winter but I
mean storm lines you know when you're
not getting melt when you when when you
get melt they operate even in the winter
I you can probably get a little bit of
ice where this thing breaks free and
runs through the air or spills down the
sun out of the pre-cast right on top of
the rip wrap.
>> Okay. Because I guess my concern was
where it comes out if that freezes and
the water can't flow. Is the water up on
the road going to go around the storm
water control and cause erosion down
into the bank.
>> Well, I would that would be just such an
extreme event. I just could not imagine.
>> I'm just curious if that's you know or
is that not not probably not
>> you know I'll never be one to say it'll
never right. But I just cannot imagine
because I mean it's a 15-inch pipe that
would have to freeze solid and at the
same time some you're somehow getting
water to run. Well, why is that solid
and water sort of a period of time where
>> the the cold temperatures got a little
warmer
>> and we actually had preip instead of
snow falling. I just
>> Okay.
>> I just can't imagine.
>> Sure. Makes sense.
Does the plan have any consideration for
the storm of the century coming through
uh while you've got half the channel
secured? I guess
better rip than
>> Yeah, that's the
>> good news is the roads already closed
and go.
>> It's a million dollar question and
inevit I want to say I want to say
inevitably because this past summer we
had I don't know three or four of these
projects going on and it worked out
great. No, but there was no big event.
Okay.
>> But it always seems like, you know, as
soon as you, you know, reduce reduce the
air waterway area, you can put it
through a smaller pipe based on a
two-year storm for the drain man. That's
no guarantee that you're not going to
get some big event coming through there
during construction that's going to
flood the coffer dam and, you know, make
a mess. Um, that's possible.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And then that has to get cleaned
up. Um, I guess it one thing I will say
is that the the flow, a two-year flow
and a 100red-year flow, they're not it's
not a linear relationship. I mean, a
two-year discharge is probably about 50%
of a of a 100red-year discharge. So,
it's that makes you feel any better. Um,
but yeah, it's possible. This year
happened to be real good. Um, I' I've
had projects where, you know, and we
have notes in the drawings. We we that's
why we show where the flood limits are.
And the notes on the drawing say, you
know, if Noah predicts a um a flood a
flood event in the area of the project
to get your stuff out of the flood
plane. That's why we show him where the
flood plane is. And you know, that
doesn't mean he's going to pull his
coffee dam, but he might pull any piles
or equipment and piles of material or
equipment or things that, you know,
could create a problem.
So, we do our best to protect against
it.
Sounds pretty good to me.
Anybody else have any concerns?
>> Let's do it. Do it tomorrow.
>> All right. So, we received the
application. Um, so have to be till next
month till we approve it. I'll reach out
to Hank and see what his thoughts are.
I'm gonna I'll reach out to Wayne too as
well to see kind of where we stand or
how we go forward without agent
and I'm sure Wayne will be in contact
with you.
I'd like to uh you know put some things
in here I said I would do um the turtle
notes and photo if you'd like me to do
that. I think it's probably a good idea
anyway about the wood turtles regardless
of whether if you guys want to just not
even worry about it I'll put it on
there. um
the notes, the time of year notes to
comply with the army corps. Anyway, um
when I do this, should I resubmit room
eyes drawings for the record? How do you
like how you like given to you certainly
days before your next meeting? Um
>> um yeah, I would reach out to I guess to
Wayne
because Wayne was contacted you before
this meeting, correct?
>> Um no, no, I'm not sure. I got an email
from three different places in town. It
was signed by Wayne, but something said
admin at Andover, zoning at Andover, and
building something. I'm not really sure.
>> Building is probably Lynn.
>> Okay.
>> Zoning is Wayne.
>> There's Wayne.
>> Admin. I don't know.
>> I think that would be Lynn, too.
>> Lynn.
>> Yeah.
I should know.
>> Yeah. Zoning would come from Wayne.
the zoning agent agent.
>> Right. So Wayne was going to reach out
to you about coming to presenting here
tonight. Just give us basically a
rundown and a briefing on the whole
project. Right.
>> Um,
>> yeah, I guess if you wanted to submit
any updates or anything to him
>> and then humanity contact,
>> do you guys do a sidewalk or
>> we we can do a sidewalk?
>> I'm not asking for it. I'm just, you
know, if you do, I guess I should be
there decide to do that.
>> Yeah. if we decide to do a sidewalk or
something. Um, do you guys feel
necessary to do one at this point?
>> I don't I'm kind of familiar with it.
>> It needs to be replaced yesterday.
>> Yeah, he's nervous after today. What's
it done yesterday? especially if it's
going to be solid concrete instead of
what we have there, which is some
something that
>> I think our sidewalk if we decide to do
one, we can definitely reach out to you
and let you know if you'd like to be
present for it.
>> And um should I get revised drawings in
a certain number of days before your
next meeting?
>> Just just so I know what to shoot for.
>> Yeah. A week would be good. I was just
going to say maybe about a week before
the next meeting. Does that work? Yeah.
Right.
Y
that's all the questions we have for
you. Okay. Thank you for showing us.
>> Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Okay. Here.
>> It's a timely thing. Thank you very
much.
>> You think you've been working on it for
a year? Couple years. Oh,
>> more than that.
>> Really?
>> Yeah. Unfortunately, it's been going on
for a while. It's just
And I don't know 66.
>> Why did it take so long?
>> I
think the design end of it. I think um I
think easements are probably the
>> polical intent. Um behind that is
typically permits, but it's not this
time. and
running a close second would be utility
coordination, but it's not. We got that
worked out. So, it's just um you know,
>> I mean, this is how typically how long
things take to get. I mean, I've had
some that that literally have gone for,
you know, 15 years unfortunately just,
you know, really DOT things which are to
blame the DOT, but it's a different, you
know, it's one
>> very regimented, very regimented, a lot
of oversight. This program sort of
leaves the buck with the chief elected
official of the town and their designer.
Um, and DOT is more of an administrative
review process like your federal local
bridge program. We just had all kinds of
we've done stuff with them. All kinds of
um engineering oversight. Well,
rightfully so. Federal money comes with
federal baggage and uh
>> but getting people organized.
>> No, based on I guess based on your
account, I'm thinking, you know, six
years ago, how bad was that bridge
looking at six years ago?
>> 20 years ago. Yeah, it was like that.
>> Yeah.
>> Way.
>> Are there others? Is there are there
going to be more? Yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't know. Nobody's
>> You don't have anything on your No,
>> Culbert on Hutchinson Road. We've got to
have the road closed.
>> Oh, I didn't know that.
>> Well, there's not a lot of traffic out
that
>> I remember looking down at somebody and
having decision just just closing the
road.
>> Yeah.
>> Really? I mean that's
>> they've been closed for years now
>> and no plan.
>> No plan. Yeah.
Um, next would be these enforcement
actions, but not going to have an issue
would be mission discussion for wetlands
agent vacancy.
>> Who do you want to talk about? We're
kind of in limbo here.
>> What I would talk about is that
you should request to via the interview
panel. So I would talking Wayne about
that. Um he's trying to set up an
interview panel.
>> So yeah, so at least we can screen
someone
to have the offer. I don't know if they
have any applicants yet or if it's
posted or
Yeah.
Is it is it like a 10 hour a week?
>> Uh, it's not even on the website.
>> Okay.
>> There's nobody here to do anything.
>> Try to find the administrator.
Yeah, we kind of have more than one.
>> Okay.
>> Right.
>> Who's who is steering the ship? So to
say
that you
respect Dwayne right now. Yeah.
>> And in see what zoning zoning
>> has been here a while
>> since Jim here.
>> I think I think Johnowski
contract
>> help out a little bit but we gota you
make that happen. I don't know where
that's needed.
John's company. Uh, they can probably
help us out a little bit.
>> Sure.
>> But, you know, Wayne's
maybe been here a little over a year
and he came with no zoning experience.
He was a
culture fell.
>> Oh, really? Just was willing to take it.
>> Yeah. didn't he's doing a very good job
of it. He came up to speed really quick.
He came up with the web side of it.
Yeah, sure.
So, the next regular meeting is
scheduled for Tuesday, May 5th at 7 p.m.
>> I like you like
>> bring
to journal meeting at 8:14 p.m. April 7.